[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>So who's buying the first box?
>>We're going to have to
give it a rest tonight, mate.
>>Under the thumb, Rick?
>>Nah, she's just been
looking at you guys.
>>Ah, under the thumb.
[LAUGHTER]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[SCREECHING TIRES]
>>Are those kids?
>>I'm afraid not
this time of night.
>>What the--
>>We've got to get out of here.
>>>>[CHANTING-NON -ENGLISH]
Call on the sun to rise.
I call on the sun to rise.
So all in this
land may once again
move in peace and harmony.
[CHANTING- NON-ENGLISH].
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[KIDS-CROSSTALK]
>>Hold on.
Hold on.
Footsteps?
Down at the forest?
Is that the same as
you heard yesterday?
>>Yes.
>>Well, what do you
think we should do?
>>Can we go have a look?
>>Ooh, down here.
Here we are, Ashton.
>>Yeah, well, we sort
of heard drumming,
and footsteps in like
this sort of direction.
And then the dog
started barking, and--
>>Well, that's interesting.
Let's have a little
listen for a minute.
Can we hear it now?
I can hear a little chainsaw
away in the distance.
Any drumming?
Any dogs barking?
>>No, it's gone now.
>>I can only hear a plane.
>>You're right.
I wonder if they flew
off on the plane?
You never know what can happen.
My personal
encounters have always
been hearing-- hearing
laughter-- hearing
music-- hearing
little fingers tapping
on the window of a bush hut and
wondering what was going on.
So all of these
things come into play.
And I think it's
very much the fact
that if you do
move within nature,
you open yourself up to
a lot more possibilities.
There's perhaps a lot of
things going on out there
that we're not really aware of.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>Do you hear that?
>>It's singing.
But where is it coming from?
>>It's beautiful harmony.
>>It's amazing.
I've lost it though.
Can you hear it still?
>>It's gone.
>>Oh, wow!
As soon as we'd opened our eyes
and spoke, the singing stopped.
So we thought, well,
this must be the other 20
people in our party
waiting to-- coming down
the river to catch up with us.
But no, they were
still six hours away.
We were that far ahead.
So that was our first
encounter with the voice.
>>Yesterday I had a meeting
with a friend of mine.
And he was telling me
about a friend of his
who lived up near Dargaville.
And he had some
government action
going on out the
back of his farm.
The government had blocked
off the whole area.
And nobody was allowed
to go in there.
Apparently they found
some little stone
huts-- some dwellings.
And these guys actually
did go into the forest
and have a look at them.
And these stones have
been carved into.
>>Researcher and documentary
producer, Annette Reed,
has come to see me
to discuss plans
on how we can make contact
with the mysterious beings
in the forest, and
investigate claims made
by some people of
encounters, and to look
at putting my finds
into a documentary.
Sit down.
OK, yeah, just let-- let me get
those coordinates again-- 5 7
6 9 2 8 1.
That's wonderful.
Hey, thanks so much for that.
You've really come up with
something that we need here.
OK, all the best.
We'll see you soon.
Bye for now.
You wouldn't believe it.
>>What's happened?
>>You've walked
at the right time.
The man who's a remote viewer--
a chap I know in Auckland.
>>So what's a remote viewer?
>>Aha!
Remote viewing--
it's a technique
which was developed
during the Cold War
times between
America and Russia.
And they were both working
on spy technology, which
is utilizing people going
into a trance-like state.
And in their mind somehow or
another projecting themselves
over tens of thousands
of kilometers
to look down and see what
they're supposed to see.
Now, this man in Auckland
that-- that I know
has been doing this
for a number of years.
And I've worked with him before.
He has a great
degree of accuracy.
So he sits in the
comfort of his own home.
I tell him a rough area, and
he'll go and have a look.
Isn't that amazing?
>>That is.
And so he's given us
something to go on, has he?
>>Yes, he certainly has.
As I move through various
parts of the northern landscape
in New Zealand,
exploring ancient sites
where the early comers to
this land used to live,
when I'd be measuring the
distance between stones
and looking at distant
views-- getting
the feeling for
the place-- doing
the notes, and the photographs,
and the measurements;
I'd often become
aware of the fact
that I was being looked at.
And I'd do the old trick.
I'd just try and whip around
quickly to see who was there.
But there was
never anyone there.
This human form that
we're all in at the moment
is a perfectly
natural shape enhanced
by the spirit which resides
within the human body.
But we are, after all,
part of the Earth.
We're part of
Papatuanuku-- the Mother
Earth-- we're part of Gaia.
And I feel that if we're
able to open ourselves
to these possibilities
when we're within nature,
then we'll start to
observe ourselves--
we'll start to get the feeling.
We'll start to
hear the messages.
We'll start to hear the song.
>>We are developing an
awareness and a range of talents
that we've hardly touched.
And this is becoming
more and more common.
So without even
trying, some people
are seeing things that
they haven't seen before
and feeling things they
haven't felt before.
And it's rather like
what's happening
is that we're
extending our senses.
>>In 2008 I was
driving down the road.
And the next thing,
boom-crash, a group of people
came flying out of some
vegetation beside the road.
I had my daughter alongside.
And we were both quite amazed
to see 15 people burst out
of these bushes walking
single file very quickly
up toward the
summit of Tua Maori.
Well, one of the things
that was remarkable to me
was that they were
wearing loin clothes.
And the one woman that was with
the group of 13 men, one child
was brunette.
The rest of them were blonde--
slightly wavy, curly hair--
sort of like the
stuff that you see
emblazoned onto
the Greek statues.
They were a bluey, greeny-eyed
people from what I could see.
I stuck my hand out
the window and my head.
I couldn't believe
what I was seeing.
The woman had a
possum-skin halter.
And I stuck my
arm out the window
in a big, wide
arc-- in a greeting.
The woman and the child at
the end of the group turned.
The child looked very
apprehensive at first,
but then this feeling of
peacefulness came over his face
as they both turned and
walked back to the vehicle
where myself and my daughter
were-- still driving along
very slowly.
And her arm went--
right arm went out
in a big, wide arc-- a
big smile on their face.
The child's face lit up.
Everything was all good.
I could tell that the men-folk
that were hidden up this track
knew of my presence, even
though no eye contact was made.
I noticed that their
backs didn't stiffen up,
even when the woman
and child turned around
to come back toward
us to have a meeting.
With my daughter
alongside me in the car,
I didn't know what to expect.
So I just kept on
going, regretfully.
I wish I would have
turned around and stopped.
>>Over the years I've had a
number of people share stories
with me.
It's like I remember the
story a lady told tell me
a few years ago of the
time she was tramping
on one of the main tracks.
And as she moved up the
track with her backpack on
and her walking
stick, she became
aware of a sound in the
forest alongside her.
And she explained to me it
was like children laughing.
And she said I didn't
take much notice.
I'd only just
started on the track.
And I assumed that
there may have
been children around
somewhere or something.
And away I went further and
further into the forest.
[CHILDREN  LAUGHING]
>>OK, what's so funny?
>>She said that's
when I realized
that I wasn't dealing
with children.
I was dealing with
something else.
I'm often asked what is the
difference between Turehu
and Patupairarehe, the names
that we use by ancient Maori
to describe the forest dwellers.
There's no difference
in those names.
It just depends what
Iwi you come from
and what term you use.
Turehu has sometimes
been interpreted
as meaning people
more with red hair.
Patupairarehe describes
the fairy folk
of the forest who are
small in stature-- three
to four-foot tall perhaps,
fair of complexion,
and fair of hair.
And they are flute playing.
The putorino or the koauau
which are two flutes,
which are known
to Maori of today.
And it is believed
that they were taught,
the Maori were taught,
the flute-making skills
by the Patupairarehe.
>>OK, so that then goes
in with the stories
of them being taught how to
make fishing nets as well.
>>Annette and I have made
plans to bring together
a group of fellow researchers
to spend the night in a forest
where we hope to have
a personal encounter.
The coordinates given to
us by the remote viewer
have directed us to a
specific forest location.
>>What I have
heard is that there
have been several
attempts to make
a documentary about this--
one by a TV channel.
And each one of these
attempts was shut down
by the Department
of Conservation.
>>There has been a
degree of sensitivity.
But the beauty of it is
that a lot of the stories
are outside the
area of the forest.
And so we actually may
not and probably won't
be filming in the forest at all.
We'll be at other
private forestry
blocks in which we
are permitted access.
And so we'll have no trouble.
Over the years there have been
many sightings at our suggested
research location.
Yet, when we ask locals to
share their stories with us,
there seems to be a
general reluctance
and an air of secrecy.
We are doing
something which I don'
think has ever been done before.
What I'm searching
for is whether or not
these people in the forests,
as I like to call them,
exist in the physical form.
Are they indeed a
lost race of people?
Are they out there?
Have they been living
in these forested parts
of New Zealand for
all these years and we
haven't stumbled across them?
Or they haven't
stumbled across us?
Or are they indeed truly a
mystical, mythical fairy folk
who exist in another dimension,
in another little universe
which is parallel to ours.
And on occasions we see them.
And occasions they see us.
I've set off on my
journey into the forest.
On my way I stop at the
workshop of dear friend
Kerry Strongman,
a woodcarver who
wishes to give me
some offerings that
may entice the little people to
come and show themselves to us.
>>Hey!
Hey brother.
>>I'm here.
>>I've got something
awesome for you.
>>What?
>>Yeah, I know you're
on a special journey .
But I've got this
really awesome.
I've put this whole collection
of stuff to assist you.
These are treasures that
I know that will help you
in your journey.
It's important that I
contribute by giving you
as many things that will bring
forth these elusive people.
We need to let the world
know that they're here,
that they will manifest
themselves to us
and maybe share a little
of their great wisdom.
As you remember, I
spent a lot of time
with aboriginals in Australia.
And they were great
teachers to me.
When I par-- when I parted
with them to come here,
they made me the
gift of their hair.
>>Aye.
>>And they wove it
together in this cord
that we would be all joined.
You'll notice that my old,
white whiskers are in there too.
But I was so humbled
when they gave this
to me, when the women wove it.
All the tribal people that I
was with, it was a small group.
And we were doing very
sacred journeying with it.
But I included this
in the treasure box
because they taught
me a lot of what
I know about spiritual things.
And I'm very grateful to them.
And I think it's
really important
that they journey with us.
So there's the box
to put that in.
Like all indigenous people,
I'm sure they're musical.
This is a spirit whistle.
So if we can't
communicate at one level,
maybe you'll be able to
communicate at another level.
There's a little story
with this-- a tragic story.
A female come ashore to die.
And after she died, they noticed
that her tummy was moving.
And inside it was
another young female.
We were unable to, even though
we birthed the young one,
we were unable to save it.
>>Aye .
>>But to show that
there's innocence,
to show that there is truth,
and that things are sacred,
this is the jaw
bone of something
that never got to be
born that might walk on
into the future bringing
peace for all of the people.
>>Aye.
Aye.
Thank you.
>>Safe voyage, my friend.
May you hear without your ears,
and see without your eyes,
and speak without your
mouth, that the little people
can hear you.
God bless.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>As I continue my
journey, I get the news
that due to cultural
sensitivity,
the Department of Conservation
has turned down our request
to film in one of
our chosen forests.
This means then that
all of our filming
will have to be done
on private land.
>>I got up one evening.
I saw a flash of
movement at the window.
I saw the tail-end of the
white here disappearing
in three different directions.
But there was a
woman left there.
I'm not sure whether
her face and hair were
covered in mud, or
soot, or whatever.
But she stayed there.
She knew that she wasn't as
visible as her outsiders.
She stayed there
looking, listening,
taking all of what was going
on and made eye contact
several times.
And through that
eye contact we both
realized there was
nothing to worry about.
And there was this
great, uplifting feeling.
And we've got nothing to
fear from these people.
But they've got everything
to fear from us.
>>We hold fear.
We bring fear in the DNA--
fear coming from our past
and from our ancient
past-- fear which
says if we speak our truth,
if we trust our own feeling
and share it with others,
and they don't accept it,
we're in danger.
We can be threatened.
We have a whole, long
history in the Dark Ages
of being tortured,
maimed, killed
in the most horrendous way
for speaking our truth.
>>The message that I
get as I walk through
is that they are waiting for us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>I'm getting this funny
feeling behind me again.
Is there something behind
us, Gordon, or not?
>>There is.
There are three
of them behind us.
>>Three?
>>Three.
>>Oh, once again
I get shivers up
and down my back when
you tell me that.
>>I sort of don't worry.
>>Ah, you don't worry?
>>It doesn't worry me.
They've come up to a point
where they can now watch and see
everywhere.
>>They can actually see us?
>>Yes.
>>We're not likely to see them?
>>No, they're very careful.
>>Well how do they
appear and disappear?
>>It's very superior bushcraft.
>>Oh.
>>And this why the Maori
were so afraid of them.
The only time they
normally would be seen
would be when they are
surprised because I also
suspect that some of
them are shape changers.
>>Wow!
So in other words,
they could just
blend in the forest background.
>>Yes.
>>Or whatever is available.
And you won't see them.
>>That's correct.
>>So no wonder-- they
are still with us.
And they're still here.
They've survived.
>>That's correct.
>>So this comes to you sort
of quite naturally, Gordon.
>>Yes.
>>You've sort of
experienced this quite a lot
over the years, haven't you?
>>Yes, but as the years go on
, I get more sensitive to this
sort of thing.
>>Yeah.
[CHATTER]
[CHANTING-NON-ENGLISH]
[SPEAKING- NON-ENGLISH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>I'd like to
relate way back when
I was between the ages
of three and eight.
My name-- my family
name was Patuhe.
Patuhe is the name
shortened for Patupairarehe.
In my household there was
about 13 of us children.
When the first mist
came with the winter,
the voices would call about
2:00 or 3:00 in the morning.
Yet, when they called
to come to play,
apparently I was the only
one would answer their call.
All the rest slept on.
My mum would hear me get up.
She thought I was just
going to the toilet.
But she'd never hear
me come back in.
And this went on
for years upon year.
As the years went by,
I'd go and play with him.
They'd come out.
The smaller children would
be there waiting for me.
Come on.
But yet they never spoke
to me with their mouth.
Everything was done
through the mind.
We could understand each other.
Yet, we never met each other.
>>Wow!
>>Yeah.
They would take me.
And they would take me down to
meet the rest of their family
with the older people
in their family.
And we'd go down.
And we'd meet them.
And they'd all laugh.
And they'd run,
and jump, and swim.
And, you know, life
to them was fun.
That was all it was-- fun.
But soon as that first
rays of the sun came,
they would say to
me we have to go.
We have to go now.
We have to go.
You come with us.
I said, no, I have to
go home to my family.
So I'd go home, run home
as if it was affecting me.
But it didn't
affect me the same.
But it affected them.
They had to be back hiding
before the sun came.
Now that went on until I was
at the age of nearly eight.
And one morning I
came tearing home,
and my mom was sitting out
on the veranda waiting.
She said to me, boy
where have you been?
I've said, oh, I've been
playing with my friends.
What friends?
Well your mates are all asleep.
I said, yeah mum, I've got
another family of friends.
You haven't been with those
Patupairarehe have you?
And I said, yes.
How long have you been
playing with them.
I said, for years.
And how do they contact you?
They'll come to me every
morning to go and play
to learn to dance with
them, learn to jump
and circle with them.
Some of them could do
two or three somersaults
before they hit the ground.
>>Wow!
>>Me, I could never get
one complete somersault.
And they used to laugh.
They all laughed at me.
But I still tried.
Anyhow, when mum
found I was doing it,
she said to me I have to
take you down to see my dad.
So she'd take me down
to see her father.
And her father would look at me.
And he would say to me.
Boy, did those
Patupairarehe ever
take you past those springs.
I said, no grandad , as soon
as I got to those springs,
they used to say to me come on.
Keep going.
We're going home.
I said, no, I have to go home.
And he'd say to my mom and dad.
Now this boy knows
he's not going
to go past springs with them.
He knows where his
boundaries are.
So he's all right.
When he gets to eight,
I was nearly eight
then, he's taller
than most of them
that I know of in
this particular band,
and they won't come
and get him anymore.
When I turned eight,
the next time around
just before Christmas--
the next winter came.
And I heard them.
And I'm up ready to go
and play, raced outside,
but they didn't come
to my place anymore.
But I could hear them
playing in the mist.
Now, that's why I kept
asking you is the mist down
now because the moment the mist
is there, they are in the mist.
They want people to realize
that they are no longer hidden,
they are no longer
a danger to us,
but they are a small
part of our community
that should have been
recognized years and years ago.
>>We hear amongst Maoridom
the tomb of Kaitiakitanga.
An English tomb's
guardianship, and a lot of us
believe that's our
role, which it is.
But it's not solely our role.
Those little people we
refer to are Kaitiaki also.
In the past, the humans
and those little people
worked together to
maintain the Kaitiakitanga.
What's been lost over
a number of generations
is the unity between
the human race
that we know as human
and those little people.
And this is what
they've been waiting
for-- the reestablishment of the
relationship between ourselves
and them.
And I'm hearing it coming
from this table tonight.
And that really warms
my heart to hear that.
[SINGING-NON-ENGLISH]
>>It was something I was
getting that is probably
a bit controversial, actually.
>>Do tell.
Do tell.
>>I was like watching her.
But those little people
have been used as food.
>>Yeah.
>>That's why they are not
so fast to materialize
in solid form in this layer.
They have the ability to.
>>Performing monkey comes
to mind-- circus act.
You know, that kind of--
and if they didn't it
was a case of-- it's not
so much like cannibalism
but more of a vampirish energy.
Does that make sense?
>>Yeah, it's like an energy.
>>Yeah, the energy, yeah.
[MUSIC PLAYING-SINGING
NON-ENGLISH]
[PHONE RINGS]
>>It's 10 to 1:00
in the morning.
The team and I are
setting up our cameras
and listening posts
ready to film whatever
may occur in and
around the forest area.
Is everyone standing still?
Oh, greetings it's--
>>There's a voice or something
over there for sure, mate.
>>There's something
walking over there?
>>Yeah, I'm sure I saw
something moving there.
>>Shh.
>>It's pretty daunting
sitting here in the dark.
It's a beautiful night.
The forest is still.
Haven't really see anything yet.
I wonder if the
beings are actually
dimensional and not as physical.
[MUSIC  PLAYING]
>>Somewhere around that tree.
>>Right there.
>>Yeah.
>>Unusual shape that, isn't it?
>>It's almost like
a square but--
>>There's definitely something
on the left-hand side of us
here.
>>I'm hearing something sort
of over in this direction
but just almost like a
rustling on the forest floor
amongst the dry leaves--
occasionally a clicking sound.
>>It's what I heard earlier
before-- some other really
faint singing coming
from deep in the forest.
It's like the wind
mixed with sound.
It was interesting, actually.
[CLICKING SOUND]
>>There's that
clicking sound again.
>>So what's the knocking?
>>It is their sticks.
It is the way that
they communicate
if they do not want
to speak, so to speak.
But they also do this to
communicate with humanity.
We're here.
>>Where I am--
sitting in the forest.
It must be just after four
o'clock in the morning.
Let's see if we can
pick up any fairy folk.
Often they are seen
just before dawn.
>>I've just got the feeling
that I'm being observed.
There's some movement out
there that I can't make it out.
It's quite a distinct-
>>Do you know in proximity how
far the fairy folk are back
from us at the moment?
Like how many meters?
>>Oh, about 50 to 70 meters
away-- the fairy folk.
You hear it?
>>I heard that.
[CLICKING SOUND]
>>There we go again.
A clicking sound.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Wow!
That's loud.
Sounds like a bird cry.
[FOOTSTEPS]
Our weekend of
exploration has come
to an end-- beautiful moments
and stories have been shared.
And yet I feel a hint
of disappointment
about not having had
an actual encounter
with the Patupairarehe--
or the fairy folk.
But the tables
are quickly turned
after I receive a phone call
from the film's director.
She has requested I make my
way to Auckland immediately
because she has spotted a
strange anomaly while viewing
our footage.
>>Yes, I wouldn't normally get
you to come over all the way
to Auckland if it wasn't for
something really important.
>>Well, I knew it would be
for something quite special.
I am sure.
>>Oh yeah, are you
ready to have a look?
>>I can't wait.
>>Yeah?
Let us go.
It's obviously the
reenactment bit.
And a shot that we didn't use.
>>Right.
>>And I've marked a circle.
>>Oh, my gosh.
What's that?
>>I saw it straight away when
I was uploading the footage.
>>OK.
>>OK, and watch
the zoom in, Gary.
That's a lot more detail.
You see that?
>>Oh, my--
>>And then there's
a little slow-mo--
>>Yeah.
>>Zoomed in.
>>Well, well, what
on earth is that?
>>So basically,
what do you think?
>>What can I think?
This is just amazing.
And the fact we set
out to find something.
And we have.
What it is I can't
really say at this stage.
We've got to have a
closer look at this.
But this is just amazing.
It's not an animal.
And it's not people.
There were no people there.
>>Yeah, so if it's not human,
and it's not an animal--
>>Oh, what have we got?
>>Then what is it?
>>What is it indeed?
What is it indeed?
>>I've been looking at
footage in New Zealand
for about 30 years now--
photographs and footage
of anomalous things
and anomalous objects.
And I certainly think that this
piece of footage is unusual.
It looks to me to be too bright
to be sunlight reflecting off
leaves.
The patches of light are
too big and too bright.
They appear to intensify in
certain parts of the footage
almost to the point of glowing.
There appear to be
several objects or figures
that some closer to the
foreground, some behind,
moving not in unison,
moving in random fashion.
We know that the
brain and the eye
can trick us into
believing we're
seeing what we want
to believe is there.
So I can't categorically
state what it is.
But there is one point in the
footage where, to me, there
is quite clearly a
rotation of something that
appears to be a
large, white head.
We see a patch of
light side view
and it appears to be an object.
And then we quite clearly
see that object rotate.
So that tells me that we're
not necessarily just looking
at sunlight reflecting
off leaves in the forest,
we're looking at something
that's actually in there
behind the trees moving.
I would suggest
that the footage be
sent to a professional
photographic data analyst
to have a closer look at it and
run it through their programs
and see if they're
able to ascertain
any further details
that might be useful.
But it certainly is anomalous
given the bush environment
that this footage was taken in.
It doesn't fit.
>>It's a very interesting
capture indeed.
The humanoid, to me,
is-- looks very--
it's very small for one thing.
And the body is just
proportionally smaller
than the head.
The head is not bulbous,
but it kind of almost
looks kind of block-headed.
This is what I call a Watcher.
A very close friend of mine,
who is also a photoanalyst,
has been researching the
Sasquatch for about 30 years.
And he found one in New Zealand.
As a matter of fact, it seems
like he found more than one,
but one really excellent
shot that is undeniable.
Now what I think
is going here is
that there's a
symbiotic relationship
between the Sasquatch
and the Watchers.
The Watchers, of course, are
looking out for the Sasquatch,
warning them of any
impending danger.
And the Sasquatch
are their protectors.
It's possible-- probable
based on the research
I've done-- that these
creatures are inter-dimensional.
But they're becoming less so
at this time, and more of them
are being seen.
>>To our amazement,
psychic dowser Gordon
had picked up on the whereabouts
of the beings about 15 minutes
after the recording of
the anomalous footage.
>>You're looking
over your shoulder.
What's behind us, Gordon?
>>Someone is back there.
>>Back there?
>>There's someone
back there now.
I'll do distance of
the one behind us now.
About 52 meters.
>>52 meters.
>>I'd be very surprised
if we even saw them today.
>>In order to be successful
in life in our society
as we have constructed
it, you have to fit in.
You have to have a set of
beliefs that are acceptable.
And the beliefs that
are primarily acceptable
are things that can
be shown, and proved,
and other people can
see for their own eyes.
>>As I arrive home, another
unexpected surprise awaits me.
>>Dear Mr. Cook, I've heard that
you're looking for information
on the fairy folk or
the Patupairarehe.
I've enclosed photographs
of small skulls.
Measurements have shown that
these small skulls are indeed
mature adult beings.
As you may be well aware,
due to cultural sensitivity,
it is not permitted in New
Zealand to handle human bones,
or send them for
radiocarbon dating, or DNA.
I hope that this
information will help you
in your invaluable research.
Kind regards, a supporter.
>>I'm feeling grateful
for the answers
I've been given
during this quest.
Yet I'm also amazed at
how, in this day and age,
there's still so much
secrecy around subjects
that should be transparent.
For it is my belief that the
truth will sit all creatures
free, both humans
and other beings.
So my journey continues.
This is not the last you have
heard from me-- or from them.
[MUSIC PLAYING]